The information and the way you train
other people is to give up the
information. If that is so, then that's
what the whole purpose of this meeting is,
this leadership. It's that we're going to
give you all the information we have. And
also, a little later, I'll explain it to
you. The program of the day today, the
first thing I want to do is you already
have information. I'm going to wait until
you discuss that in a moment. I'm
circulating two different sheets. One is
your earliest availability to go south.
And I know that you have problems flying
over. So you want to be careful where you
go. But you have your earliest
availability. That's on the sheet that
says, Littleman got earliest availability.
And then there's another sheet going
around that says the percentage of cars.
And we want to know if you have a car,
what its capacity is, and when you're
leaving. So they'll be making their ways
around. We'll get to that later this
afternoon. We're going to give you an
opportunity to ask some questions about
Wavelength and the home of the group. And
then a little bit later in the morning,
we're going to have a panel put together
of people, veterans related to having
recently returned from the South. and to
talk about the problems of regular
abortion in southern communities. There
are a lot of people who have not yet been
interviewed, and we're aware of this, and
our interview committee and screening
committee is too. What we will ask you to
do at the lunch break, instead of taking a
normal one hour, we'll take one hour and a
half, and we'll go through a 12-minute
interview. Those of you who have not yet
been interviewed, we'll just say right
there on that screen,
The orientation program will be designed
to familiarize you with Mississippi, the
people who are in the party and the
planned summer programs. At the
orientation session, you will be assigned
to particular counties in which you will
work and will meet the Mississippi people
with whom you will be working. At the
orientation session, a final decision on
your acceptance will be made, for the MFDP
must attempt to avoid all of the trouble
possible for Mississippi. It's still a
dangerous place. This does not pertain to
you. You see, they're also dealing with
lots of people individually all over the
country, and Canada for that matter, too.
If you've been screened up here, you've
been accepted down. The session will be
held at the Gulfside Methodist Assembly
Waveland, Mississippi on the Gulf Coast.
Travel directions are included. The
orientation will start at 2 p.m. Thursday,
June 10th. An evening meal will be served.
The session will end Tuesday, June 15th
after breakfast, at which time you will go
to the county where you will be working.
If at all possible, bring a sleeping bag
for some people who may need it. We are
also asking you to bring $25 to help us
defray the expense of the session. It
costs $5 a day to house and feed each
volunteer. I'll explain that in a moment.
The MFDP has almost no money at all now.
This also means that we must ask you to
provide your own transportation to
Waveland. Speaking of money, we must ask
that you provide your own subsistence for
the summer. This means about $15 per week.
housing will be arranged for you with
people living in the county in regards to
housing you must not expect facilities
that you are probably used to this means
that there may be no indoor plumbing no
running water no hot water but the people
you stay with will more than make up for
the lack of facilities you should bring
comfortable summer clothing to wear and
unless you want to go to church you will
not need dress clothing at all you should
avoid bringing a lot of baggage because
you will probably not need it and a lot of
baggage will be difficult to carry around
you should also bring your own personal
items such as toilet articles or some
point for in some places they may not be
easily gotten if possible you should bring
a typewriter typing paper carbon paper
also if you are able to bring a car at all
please do you have a tremendous lack of
transportation not only in jackson but in
all also in other counties if you do bring
a car you should try to be able to cover
operating expenses you should know that
the mississippi law requires license
mississippi license plates after 60 days
in the state the tax costs four percent of
the estimated value of the car the last
thing we should mention is bail contacts
there may be some trouble with quote
mississippi officials unquote for the mfdp
has not yet quote reached unquote them we
We expect less trouble with them this
summer than last, but a chance still
remains that you may enjoy the local
government's hospitality. We would like to
know a few people we can contact for bond
money. $500 will be sufficient in case you
are arrested. We will have good legal help
for you if this problem comes up. It is
very important you attend the orientation
session. what you will be doing will be
discussed and you will have a chance to
talk to the people with whom you will be
working. That one, it should have stayed
the last semester, whatever they want.
Now this then is the detail of what the
rest of the information from Waveland. The
first two pages give you an idea of the
counties in Mississippi which will have
programs this summer. some of the numbers
of people they will be needing. And we
purposely reprinted the whole thing,
although it might not all be useful to
you. But just to give you an idea of what
the range of projects are, all the way
from, you see, sewing to adult education,
voter registration, and so on. And these
are for you to keep if you like. The total
number of volunteers, that's for the whole
country, It will be 439, and then like
about 150 from here. We have,
incidentally, over 100 that are not yet
assigned and probably go. This is the rest
of the next two pages of transportation
information.
And you'll see the reason for
transportation coming from New Orleans if
you'll turn to the next to the last page,
because the map is there.
New Orleans is your best or fastest way to
go if you're coming from out here. Highway
90 is that major scenic highway that
follows the Gulf Coast, Florida, if you're
driving from New Orleans.
and some of the information I just read to
you from that letter is contained on the
last page
now what I'd like to do is stop here right
here and talk about it. Yes.
Yeah. We've discussed this with SNCC
regional people. We urge you not to go to
Washington, but if you can get down here
faster to go to Mississippi.
If you're going what? You mean to visit
family? And what's the question?
And get back down here as quick as you can
to Mississippi. Yeah. Unless you happen to
be living in Washington. We have one
that's very close. What do you think,
Mike? Where are you? Yeah. If you're that
close.
Not unless it works out that the person
sitting on this side of the room right now
is jotting down in his piece of paper that
I have a car leaving from New York on June
19th. We have no way of working this out.
Yeah? They may have cars.
You have a... Do you know the address
offhand?
Okay.
In other words, if you will be arriving in
Mississippi after the 15th? No, you put
that down on the sheet that's coming
around, and what we're going to suggest to
Mississippi people is that all of you
people go directly to Jackson, to their
central office, and then be assigned from
there around the state.
You got one separately? Yeah. Yeah.
Well, if you've been... Have you been
interviewed here? Yeah. Then you've been
accepted in the Mississippi project,
right? There are a few people who wrote
independently of this next screening
process up here, and they heard
independently themselves. But they sent us
a list of your names.
Well, because they need the people down
here right quick, and we haven't even been
able to honor the needs of one or two of
the small counties that have needs right
now, so that it doesn't seem to make sense
to go clear east and spend a week or two
doing that when they need people right now
in Mississippi.
Well, we're going to suggest that there be
an orientation, but I think that they will
probably not be able to organize another
statewide one, but there will be an
orientation at your local project. It
won't be as an elaborate one as this.
I would suggest you give your two weeks
notice.
I'll bring the 400 with you.
Or a car. Let me just see if I show a
hand. How many do have cars? Oh, that's
great. I mean that are going south. Cars
are going south.
We're going to get the Arkansas people
together. Is Vince here someplace? During
the lunch period, Vince, why don't you
stand up so the other Arkansas people can
see. This is Vincent O'Connor. During
lunch, let's get the Arkansas people
together down here. Okay? Okay, with this,
down in this corner right here. And we'll
work separately on transportation and what
we report to and all this stuff over
there. Yes.
Have already what? Yes. Yes. Yes, let me
see how many Arkansas people are there.
Just put your hands up so I can count.
One, two, three, four. Four. Okay, ten
people were selected for Arkansas. They
did their own, we sent them a whole batch
of applications. They pulled out of it
what they thought were their needs, and
then they wrote directly to these people
accepting them. Since then, we've had a
little bit of attrition. I think we lost a
few via the marriage route and other ways.
So we're going to have to replace them. If
somebody has a particular driving need,
they want to go to Arkansas, So you can
tell me about it during the lunch period.
Otherwise, we're just going to be
selecting people for you have some. So all
right.
There are four people left last week for,
I think, Carroll County. That's on the
sheet someplace, I'm sure. And a couple
have gone off to other practice, other
kinds of work a little bit earlier. And
then we also lost a few to CORE and SLCC
because we did not have enough definite
information about summer projects and
people had to make commitments, but that's
not a loss.
Let me just see by a show of hands so we
all know ourselves. How many can make
Waveland on June 10th?
Yeah, 10 or 12. So can anybody, those who,
just keep your hands down. How about other
people that can make part of Waveland, say
the 13th or the 15th?
Oh, that's pretty soon.
You're all young people driving all night?
A day plus.
You start at 8 o'clock one morning. You
should make it 6 o'clock the next night.
Day and a half.
Yes, that's the 1.30. It's recession
today. I'm going to try to arrange it
properly.
Yeah, 24, 12, 36 hours.
I don't know what it is with you people.
I've driven to Iowa in that time.
Further?
Maybe that's why. Two days. Uh, 36 hours.
Uh, you got a lot of money to spend on the
station here.
Well, some people do. What's the distance?
Does anybody know? Um, I think I'm gonna
say it's... 2,000? 1,700 miles to Selma
Station. How much? 1,700 miles to Selma
Station. That's the minimum, sir. Yeah,
but that's further east, isn't it? Yeah,
that's north of that. I would say about 2
,000 miles. 2,000 miles. Yeah, that's what
I figured, about 2,000 miles. Yeah.
Make 1,000 miles a day. Yeah. Why is
Mississippi asking for 130 volunteers?
Well, as it works out, we seem to be the
only ones, or at least the only ones we
know about that are this well organized
quote unquote so they you know we told
them we'd have about 150. i think a lot of
people have written directly to them and
so they're dealing with a lot of people
individually but they're counting on us
for one large patch
and has been interviewed right
oh we made the assumption in your case
that you're both are both good screen
you're going to go together
any other questions are wavelength
all right uh phase two then for this
morning is to uh get this panel together
and uh talk about uh problems of living
there now what we intend to do here is uh
bring this people this group of people
forward and uh give them all a minute or
two to just open up areas that we'll get
into in some depth but a lot of it will be
in response to what your questions are too
of this panel and uh you'll i'll introduce
the panel to you uh very briefly but it'll
give you an idea of what they have to
offer to you let me first call up frank
vitts and frank powell who are working up
north
who are from alabama and I'll tell you
about life in Alabama. Ron Bridgeforth
from Secretary of Defense. What happened
to Ron? I think he must be standing
outside or something. Is Doug Smith here?
He was due with him, so maybe he went to
get him or something. Kathy Kappen, who
spent about seven months, And then, of all
things, got married and went back to
Mississippi recently on a honeymoon.
Mike Miller, regional coordinator of SNCC
in this area. Neil Friedman, who is with
our screening committee at Langley Porter,
some colleges, and will be teaching at a
certain Negro college this year.
And that's it for the moment. We'll wait
for Ron, and when Ron and Doug come, they
can just join us. Thank you.
Doug, you want to come up here, please?
Doug Smith is the 5th Congressional
District Program Director for Snake and
Mississippi.
And Ron, I think it would be good if you
would sort of kick things off and get out
of your way here.
Well, the man just said, tell you what it
is, I live in Mississippi. And that's
somewhat impossible. I mean you run into
maybe, well you run into orientations in
Waveland and come late probably one in
Jackson. There were two orientations in
Oxford, Ohio last summer. And people try
to talk about, and will try to talk about
what it's like to be in Mississippi and
work on voter registration.
Now I'll start off by saying you can't be
prepared for that. I mean it's a different
world.
It's like, you might not like policemen
now, but at least you can ask them for
directions.
And like people are going to attempt to
scare the hell out of you so you don't go
around the highways at 70 and 80 miles an
hour before you learn what it's all about.
and God, I hope you don't.
You're going to run into people that
really hate your guts. I mean, they'd
rather see me, because at least I'm black,
but you're a traitor. You're a traitor to
the white race and white supremacy. And
they look at it in those terms. You're
going to run into very scared southern
white men who have their backs against the
wall, whose very way of life and existence
I mean, is being torn away from you. The
foundation of their lives is the Southern
Negro. And he's standing up. He's being
laid down all his life, and they've been
standing on his back, and suddenly he's
beginning to stand up. And what do they
do? They have to follow. I mean, Baldwin
articulates that whole situation very
well, in terms of walking out in the
morning and seeing the whole sky in
flames. I mean, it destroys your grasp
upon reality. And these men are very
scared. They're fighting back like a
corner cat in a corner. He's going to
start striking me out any way possible,
just out of fear.
And during the years of 61, 60, 61, 62,
63, there wasn't much in the way of
stopping that man from just striking me
out and hitting people and killing people.
Because of last summer, and because of the
virtual challenges going on now, he's also
become very image conscious. So it's a bit
safer than last summer. I mean, he doesn't
want any trouble. He doesn't want...I
mean, sheriffs don't want to be Sheriff
Rainey all over again. So, I mean, they're
kind of backing up. And they're being
pushed farther and farther with this stuff
now. And they're trying things like now to
get you on every charge they can. and
they're going to get you to contribute to
the Lincoln C4-1 account, you're just
going to have to watch yourself. And sure,
they'll make deals here and there, and
say, well, we'll give you 10 years and you
leave the state of Alabama. You've got a
choice, you know.
But that should be told again and again.
And fear is a good, healthy thing. It
keeps you alive. And I'd say now, if
you're not afraid, and you feel no fear,
don't go. because there's something wrong.
I think the attitude to go in with is that
you don't know and you don't have the
answers. At least not the answers, because
I don't know if there's the answers. And
those people are going to basically do
what they want to do. They know what they
want. Maybe it's not what you think they
need, but they know what they want. and
you're going in with the attitude of
helping them to get it. And if you can't
agree to that, then you should leave, I
think. Because you're not going down there
to sell your line and propagate what you
believe. But you're going down there to
help those people do what they're trying
to do. Maybe you bring in some outside
knowledge, some outside skills.
And if you think you know a better way of
doing something, say it. don't try to make
them do it. I mean that's just, you can't
make people do things in the first place.
You don't have that much influence and you
just create confusion. There'll be a lot
of situations where you find that because
you are Northern White and with college
backgrounds, people tend to be intimidated
by that. And you'll have to deal with that
when you get to that. Sometimes you find
that you can't talk. I mean you simply
can't talk until other people express what
they believe. Because if you talk first,
then they're too intimidating to talk.
Because you become like God, you know, the
Savior, which you know you're not.
There are a lot of other things that
become a lot touchier, like the
relationship of you related to Slick's
staff. Slick is basically black. It's
black oil. to propagate black leadership,
which is not such a bad thing. But you
find almost a reversal of what you find
with southern white men. You find black
sharpness and black supremacy. And last
summer at Oxford, the volunteers saw a
very weird thing. They saw people who had
been running across Mississippi for three
years, going through all sorts of hell,
little scared out of their wits for a
number of reasons. One, they were afraid
of the responsibility of 750 white
volunteers and trying to keep them alive.
And two, some of them were afraid of being
overrun by white intellectuals.
But you're two very valid figures. And
they didn't know how to deal with that.
And a great number of the volunteers felt
like they were shut out and isolated. That
they weren't talked to. That people
wouldn't tell them what was going on. And
I thought this. It's a closed, cold, cold
staff meeting. Well, hell, I'm a project
director. But you're not state staff,
you're not court staff. It became a very,
you know, it's all they had. A lot of that
is broken down, but still you're going to
find a reversal of pregnancy. I mean,
after 20 years of being kicked around in
the states of Mississippi and Alabama, in
the northern ghettos, because you're
black, you can't help but dislike white. I
mean, these people are not, you know,
They're not Jesus or anybody else because
they don't love all men. And they have
real hate towards the white race. And
they're fighting with these. I mean, it's
a struggle. And you're not going to like
it. Maybe you're not supposed to like it.
But you're going to have to realize it's
there. It's in the framework of what's
there. There have been volunteers who've
come back, you know, really down on his
neck. especially white females because
they just don't have power. I mean the
priority in terms of people wanted to go
south was black southerners, white
southerners, black northerners, white
northerners. You break that northerners
down, white male northerners and last but
not least was white female law that was
just it that works that way in terms of
how much you can get how much influence
you have you're a black male you carry
yourself like you know what you're doing
and you do your job to move people to move
people and staff outside of staff your
wife email and you don't work go to build
a black man comes along, you have no
influence, you have no power. People are
constantly working to get you out of the
state. I think you should be put out of
the state. And this is another unfortunate
thing. Last summer, too many, and one was
too many, white females came into the
state simply to sleep with white, black
males. And this was something that
couldn't be found out, you know, from
psychological testing, of course.
And you know, at least I hope you can
begin to understand the reaction of black
females as sick. I mean, the black males
were castrated all through this country.
Black females had to put up with, you
know, shit from one end to the other. And
suddenly here are men beginning to emerge
as truly men in this country who are
black, and white females come along and
take them away. And that's the one topic
of conversation that everybody talks about
here. Everybody. That whole sex hang-up.
And maybe that's the largest hang-up in
this country. And when you put it in terms
of race, it just becomes a very sick
thing.
The world's not going to change overnight,
but when I talk to volunteers who are
going south, usually on a very personal
level, one to two or two to one, I put it
very bluntly, especially the white
females. The only way you're going to make
it inside the civil rights movement of the
south is work. I mean, that's the only
thing that proves you. I mean, the people,
you know, we don't care what you think or
why you're going. that's your business as
long as you do the job
the other thing is going to prove his work
I just sleep with what you want to sleep
with but you're gonna run into a lot of
lines and a lot of beautiful people it's
very twisted by the society and you're
simply gonna have to watch yourself if you
expect to survive
That's a very grim picture. But it's this
country, and with this country and this
society, it's done to people.
In terms of data, as I said before, I
don't think it's half as bad as it was in
the last summer. And it's unfortunate that
those 750 white volunteers from the North
was the only thing that could break that
state. The black people have been dying
there for 40 years. Suddenly two white
northerners die, and this whole country is
up in arms. But they did make it possible
for people to go into counties and work
where nobody could work before for
registration. Counties where there were 4
,000 whites and 12,000 Negroes, and
nobody's been registered since
Reconstruction.
They walked in, the Senators started
calling, the Senators started calling on
phones, the Governor started calling, the
FBI walked in, the Justice Department
walked in, and the Sheriff said, Goddamn.
And it worked. And a lot of those people
did, you know, really good jobs. And
there's a job for you to, you know, do in
the state of Mississippi. Everybody can't
work on voter registration full time.
People have got to eat. And each county
just about laid out its program and asked
for the number of volunteers that it
wants. There's going to be a difference
this summer in terms of who you work for.
Last summer people basically worked under
the guidance of SNCC. It's a nice little
establishment, to say the least. But this
summer you're working for the FTP, which
is better in one way, because you don't go
into a county trying to make contacts or
trying to get into the community you have
somebody in the community asking for you
and waiting for you you got it made on the
other hand they're a hell of a lot more
conservative in terms of dress,
sexualized, religion and please don't go
around trying to convince the good sisters
they should be a
religious have a personal thing anyway for
too many years that's the only thing that
they've had keep them going when you
attack that you would take attack the
basic finally those are the big you're
gonna lose just leave that top They're
going to draw you out, you know, make your
own decisions on the spot.
But they have their programs laid out,
community centers, freedom schools, voter
registration, specialized projects. And in
some instances, they're asking people with
specialized skills. And go in. They know
what they want done. They want your help.